me: lets talk about a certain experiment.
kid: ..
me: so, they took three people. one was a chess grand master, the other just a regular chess player, and the third one didn't know anything about chess, not even the names of the pieces.
kid: ok. what did they have to do?
me: they were shown a board of chess. each board contained the exact same position, containing many pieces of black and white pieces.
kid: that's not fair.
me: I didn't tell you what they had to do yet.
kid: they had to win in a few moves, right?
me: nope. they were given some time, I don't remember how much, maybe a minute, maybe less, to look at the board before it got wiped. then, they had to reconstruct it from memory.
kid: oh.
me: who do you think reconstructed better?
kid: the grand master!
me: yep, that's right.
kid: then the one who knew how to play.
me: correct again!
kid: then the one who didn't know how to play.
me: right. no surprises so far, right?
kid: yeah.
me: ok, now for the second part of the experiment.
kid: there is a second part??
me: yep. now listen. next, they setup a board again, but this time, the pieces were arranged randomly on the board. it was not a real position that could have happened in a real game.
kid: oh, like pawns at the beginning of the board?
me: yeah, something like that.
kid: [thinking].
me: they again had some time to see the board, and then it was wiped and they had to reconstruct it again.
kid: ooh, I know! it was not logical, the grand master didn't have any advantage, so they all didn't remember the places of many pieces.
me: correct!
kid: [smiling]
me: you correctly predicted the results of each part of the experiment. good job. but what is the conclusion?
kid: that i'm smart!
me: and very modest :) other than that?
kid: uh, I don't know..
me: it's related to human brain and memory.
kid: that the memory of the grand master is better than the rest.
me: but then why did the grand master perform so poorly in the second part of the experiment?
kid: hmm.. then, the memory of the grand master is the same?
me: probably so. but then, how did the grand master did so much better compared to the others, in the first part of the experiment?
kid: I don't know..
me: lets think about how many details did the first person had to remember. for example, if there was a black pawn in the right bottom corner.
kid: then he had to remember three things: pawn, black, bottom corner.
me: but he doesn't know what a "pawn" is!
kid: oh.. right.. then, he had to remember the shape of the pawn, that it had a small "ball" at the top, and that it's pretty short, and that it looks like a human without hands :)
me: right. so many details, right?
kid: yeah..
me: what about the regular chess player?
kid: three things: pawn, black, bottom corner.
me: correct. what about the grand master?
kid: also three things: pawn, black, bottom corner!
me: I think that the grand master probably had to remember even less things than that.
kid: how?
me: grand masters learn many different "positions". they study them and remember them. so, if one grand master wanted to describe a certain known position to another grand master, what do you think she would have to say?
kid: where every piece is placed!
me: but it's a common and known position. probably to both of them.
kid: [eurika moment] ah! the name of the position!
me: correct! so how many things to remember?
kid: one! only the name! just one thing to remember for an entire position!
me: that's right. and that's probably the number of details that the grand master had to remember in the first part of the experiment, because it contained a position that was a "common" chess position. or maybe a combination of some known positions that the grand master has names for!
kid: I get it! so in the second part, the grand master lost her advantage, because it was not a "common" position, so she had to try to remember all the pieces the same way the regular chess player had to.
me: right again. so this entire thing shows that the memory is pretty much the same, and is pretty limitted in how many details it can store in a single short view.
kid: so i'm like a grand master?
me: well, not exactly, but you probably have the same memory capacity :)
me: but let me ask you something else. what is a "name" then?
kid: uh.. we call things by names.. I don't know how to explain it..
me: what if you wanted to tell me that you want to go to the pool, but without saying the name "pool"?
kid: hmm.. I'd say a place with water, that you can swim in.
me: right. that's a lot of words instead of just one word "pool". right?
kid: yes..
me: we sort of "shrunk" many words into a single word, right?
kid: I guess so..
me: that's what names allow us to do. they allow us to shrink or compress many details into a single detail. and that's how we store things in our memories! and that's how we learn! that's what the grand master learns to do.
