kid: dad, how much money do you have in the bank?
me: eeh, enough I hope?
kid: but how much? ben said his father has two and a half million in the bank!
me: oh, really? that's a lot. why does he need so much?
kid: to buy things! buy a big house!
me: I see. what if money didn't exist?
kid: how would we buy things?
me: exactly. how would we? suppose you want to buy a pair of roller blades.
kid: eeh, I don't know.. oh, maybe we can give my old bike in exchange!
me: I guess we can offer your old bike.
me: what if one of your friends wants your bike. he has some old clothes that he doesn't use anymore, and he is prepared to give them in exchange for the bike.
kid: no way! I don't need his old clothes.
me: right. now suppose another friend has a brand new pair of roller blades.
kid: wow! Maybe I can get them from him?
me: perhaps. he doesn't want your old bike though.
kid: what does he want? maybe we can give him something else we have?
me: we don't have anything else to give..
kid: it's hopeless?
me: maybe not. he says he wants some clothes.
kid: but we don't have any clothes! it doesn't help us!
me: yes, but your other friend has some clothes that we didn't want, and he also wanted your old bike remember?
kid: aahh! we can exchange our bike for his clothes, and then run to the other friend and exchange the clothes for the roller blades! yes!
me: yep. that would work.
kid: it's like how we pokemon trade cards at school, dad!
me: yeah. but what if your friend who gave you the roller blades, didn't want clothes nor your old bike, but instead some a new school bag?
kid: nooo! now we need to find someone who has a bag and wants one of our items??
me: unfortunately, yes.
kid: [this doesn't scale! you wish he said that..]
me: let me tell you a story about a king who lived a long time ago.
me: his subbordinates were always complaining about how their food was sometimes rotting before they were quick enough to find a group of people who could swap other kind of goods such as foods, clothes, furniture and so on, between them. like we saw, it is pretty cumbersome, right?
me: so one day, he decided to give them silver coins with his name and portrait imprinted on them. only his blacksmiths could produce them. he said to his people that they can give him their goods in exchange for his silver coins. he also promised them that they can buy services and goods from him using his silver coins.
me: one of the blacksmiths that were minting the silver coins, decided that he would accept some silver coins in exchange for his services as blacksmith.
me: when this blacksmith wanted to buy some bread and milk from some farmer, he offered several silver coins in return. the farmer didn't want the silver at first, but the blacksmith told him that he can always bring the coins to the king and get what he needs. so the farmer decided to take the coins.
me: the farmer went to the cobbler to get some sandals because his were already worn and torn. he persuaded the cobbler to take some coins in return for the new sandals. the cobbler believed in the strength and integrity of their king, so he accepted the coins.
me: with time, more and more people heard about the coins, and decided to trade coins for their services. some went straight to the king and got their coins from him.
me: but, not all people agreed to take the coins. one time our blacksmith wanted to buy fur. but the other farmer didn't want to take coins in exchange. so the blacksmith decided to go to the king and tell him that this farmer didn't want to accept the king's coins. he said the farmer needed a saddle for a horse. the king then made an arrangement with the farmer. he gave him a saddle from his private stock, and took back some coins from the blacksmith in exchange for the saddle. the farmer gave some fur to the blacksmith in exchange for the saddle.
me: on the way home, the farmer pondered about the coins, and decided that the king is worth his word. he decided that he would accept his silver coins.
me: a few days later, a soldier came to buy some fur. the farmer needed to repair a fence. the blacksmith was his neighbour, so he decided to sell some fur for coins and then go straight to the blacksmith and give him some coins in exchange for repairing his fence. he thought that it would be a waste of time to travel all the way to the king palace just to make an arrangement of exchanging his fur for repairing his fence.
me: the farmer believed that the blacksmith would accept the king's coins from him in exchange for repairing his fence.
