kid: dad, this man is homeless!
me: why do you think so?
kid: because, dad, he is pushing a supermarket cart on the street!
me: I see. why do you think that someone who is pushing a cart on the street is homeless?
kid: because I saw them before! they were collecting things, and they were kind of dirty..
me: so now you assume that anyone who looks dirty and pushes a cart on the street is homeless?
kid: yeah..
me: remember we were reading Mark Twain's book Pudd'nhead Wilson?
kid: eeh, yeah, about the black slaves, and Tom who was actually a slave but his mother swapped him with another non-slave baby?
me: right. afro-american's were forcefully bought and transported to america to be slaves many hundred years ago. at some points there was a civil war between the south and the north. the outcome was that slavery was not allowed anymore.
me: but, still afro-americans were not accepted to high-paying jobs, nor universities. so, their children and grandchildren were mostly working in simple jobs.
me: this unfortunately led some people to think that afro-americans were not as smart as all people, just because many of them were working in non-intellectual jobs. this is of course very wrong.
kid: so they are smart?
me: some are smart, some are less smart, some are talented in dancing, while others are great lawyers and judges. you remember in the book, the most respectable citizen was a judge? and right after him followed several lawyers?
kid: yeah, they had some slaves.
me: right. the bottom line is that as with all people, there are all sort of people among afro-american's. including smart. thinking that there are no smart people among afro-american is called a stereotype. it's also called prejudice or bias.
kid: dad, why do people think that way?
me: there is actually a reason for that. when we see something, we try to learn something from it. for example, when you were little you thought that a tv is something that people always had. you thought that because we have a tv, all your friends have a tv, your grandparents have a tv, your uncle etc. from all these observations you learned that all people in all time had a tv. you were actually surprised when I told you that tvs didn't exist two hundred years ago. 
me: but something interesting happened right after I told you that. you asked me whether a computer is also something that didn't exist 200 years ago. you see, you assumed that a computer is like a tv, which is a generalization on it's own. a useful one, because it led you to learn additional information about computers. and maybe even more things you just assumed but didn't ask.
kid: yeah, I remember that dad! did you have a computer when you were a kid?
me: yeah. I got one when I was in the fourth grade. it was very slow. there was no internet yet. I got several games, which had very basic graphics. today's computers are much better.
me: also, we had a tv, but it was very big and deep. not like the flat tvs and screens we have today.
